README.md, before:

# goSAT
goSAT is an SMT solver for the theory of floating-point arithmetic (FPA) that is based 
on global optimization.

## Overview 
goSAT is an SMT solver based on mathematical global optimization. It casts the satisfiability
problem of FPA to a corresponding global optimization problem. 
It builds on the ideas proposed in [XSat]. Compared to XSat, we implemented 
the following key features:

- JIT compilation of SMT formulas using LLVM.
- Integration with NLopt, a features-rich mathematical optimization backend.

More details are available in our FMCAD'17 [paper] (accepted) and this [appendix]

## Citing

If you use goSAT in an academic work, please cite:

```
@inproceedings{BenKhadra2017a,
author = {{Ben Khadra}, M Ammar and Stoffel, Dominik and Kunz, Wolfgang},
booktitle = {Proceedings of Formal Methods in Computer-Aided Design (FMCAD'17)},
doi = {10.23919/FMCAD.2017.8102235},
pages = {11--14},
title = {{goSAT: Floating-point Satisfiability as Global Optimization}},
year = {2017}
}
```

## Dependencies

This project depends on:

- [Z3] library for input file parsing and model validation
- [LLVM] for JIT execution of SMT formulas.
- [NLopt] for finding the minima of the objective function. 
 
Installing z3 and nlopt should be straightforward. As for installing LLVM, you might 
find this [tutorial] to be useful. goSAT is known to work with z3 v4.6 and LLVM v4.0.1.

## Building 

You can build the project using a command like,

```bash
cd build
cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release -DCMAKE_PREFIX_PATH=/home/gosat/local/ -DLLVM_DIR=/home/gosat/local/llvm/lib/cmake/llvm/ ..
make
```
assuming that `libnlopt` and `libz3` are installed at the prefix `${HOME}/local/` 
while `llvm` is installed at `${HOME}/local/llvm`. 

## Usage
An SMT file need to be provided using `-f` option. Additionally, operation mode
can be set. goSAT supports three operation modes:

 - **Native solving**. This the default mode where a given formula is first transformed
 to an objective function in LLVM IR . Then, the objective function is jitted using MCJIT
 and solved using the NLopt backend.  This mode can be explicitly chosen 
 using `-mode=go` option.
 
 - **Code generation**. Mimics the behavior of [XSat] where C code representing the
  objective function is generated. 
  Generated code needs to be compiled and solved using on of the tools we provide in `tools` folder.
  This mode can be enabled using `-mode=cg` option which makes goSAT output 
  an objective function in C language. Moreover, you can specify an API dump format 
  `-mode=cg -fmt=plain` for generating several objective functions. The latter is useful for 
  building a library as discussed [here](tools/README.md).

 - **Formula analysis**. A simple analysis to show the number of variables, their
 types, and other misc facts about a given SMT formula. This mode is enabled
 using `-mode=fa` option.

The default output of goSAT is in csv format listing benchmark name, sat result, 
elapsed time (seconds), minimum found, and status code returned by `nlopt`. 
The minimum found should be zero in case of `sat`. 
Use option `-smtlib-output` for conventional solver output which is more succinct.

## Model validation

In the case of `sat` result, it is possible to intruct `goSAT` to externally validate the 
generated model using `z3`. This can be done by providing parameter `-c`. For example,

```bash
./gosat -c -f formula.smt2
```

So far, we have not encountered any invalid result. Please report to us if you 
find any such cases.


  [Z3]: <https://github.com/Z3Prover/z3>
  [LLVM]: <http://llvm.org/>
  [online]: <http://www.cs.nyu.edu/~barrett/smtlib/QF_FP_Hierarchy.zip>
  [XSat]: <http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-41540-6_11>
  [NLopt]: <https://github.com/stevengj/nlopt>
  [paper]: <https://blog.formallyapplied.com/docs/gosat.pdf>
  [appendix]: <https://blog.formallyapplied.com/2017/05/gosat-faq/>
  [tutorial]: <https://github.com/abenkhadra/llvm-pass-tutorial>

Commit message:

Set goSAT result to *sat* or *unknown*
this avoids confusions and is more consistent with the
terminology used in the formal methods community.

README updated to reflect this.

README.md, after:

# goSAT
goSAT is an SMT solver for the theory of floating-point arithmetic (FPA) that is based 
on global optimization.

## Overview 
goSAT is an SMT solver based on mathematical global optimization. It casts the satisfiability
problem of FPA to a corresponding global optimization problem. 
It builds on the ideas proposed in [XSat]. Compared to XSat, we implemented 
the following key features:

- JIT compilation of SMT formulas using LLVM.
- Integration with NLopt, a features-rich mathematical optimization backend.

More details are available in our FMCAD'17 [paper] and this [appendix]

## Citing

If you use goSAT in an academic work, please cite:

```
@inproceedings{BenKhadra2017a,
author = {{Ben Khadra}, M Ammar and Stoffel, Dominik and Kunz, Wolfgang},
booktitle = {Proceedings of Formal Methods in Computer-Aided Design (FMCAD'17)},
doi = {10.23919/FMCAD.2017.8102235},
pages = {11--14},
title = {{goSAT: Floating-point Satisfiability as Global Optimization}},
year = {2017}
}
```

## Dependencies

This project depends on:

- [Z3] library for input file parsing and model validation
- [LLVM] for JIT execution of SMT formulas.
- [NLopt] for finding the minima of the objective function. 
 
Installing z3 and nlopt should be straightforward. As for installing LLVM, you might 
find this [tutorial] to be useful. goSAT is known to work with z3 v4.6 and LLVM v4.0.1.

## Building 

You can build the project using a command like,

```bash
cd build
cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release -DCMAKE_PREFIX_PATH=/home/gosat/local/ -DLLVM_DIR=/home/gosat/local/llvm/lib/cmake/llvm/ ..
make
```
assuming that `libnlopt` and `libz3` are installed at the prefix `${HOME}/local/` 
while `llvm` is installed at `${HOME}/local/llvm`. 

## Usage
An SMT file need to be provided using `-f` option. Additionally, operation mode
can be set. goSAT supports three operation modes:

 - **Native solving**. This the default mode where a given formula is first transformed
 to an objective function in LLVM IR . Then, the objective function is jitted using MCJIT
 and solved using the NLopt backend.  This mode can be explicitly chosen 
 using `-mode=go` option.
 
 - **Code generation**. Mimics the behavior of [XSat] where C code representing the
  objective function is generated. 
  Generated code needs to be compiled and solved using on of the tools we provide in `tools` folder.
  This mode can be enabled using `-mode=cg` option which makes goSAT output 
  an objective function in C language. Moreover, you can specify an API dump format 
  `-mode=cg -fmt=plain` for generating several objective functions. The latter is useful for 
  building a library as discussed [here](tools/README.md).

 - **Formula analysis**. A simple analysis to show the number of variables, their
 types, and other misc facts about a given SMT formula. This mode is enabled
 using `-mode=fa` option.

The default output of goSAT is in csv format listing benchmark name, sat result, 
elapsed time (seconds), minimum found, and status code returned by `nlopt`. 
The minimum found should be zero in case of `sat`. 
Use option `-smtlib-output` for conventional solver output which is more succinct.

Note that goSAT is an incomplete solver which means that we can not prove an instance
to be `unsat` even if it's actually so. Therefore, goSAT reports back either `sat` or `unknown`.
Being incomplete, gives goSAT an edge in efficiency over conventional solvers like `z3` 
and `mathsat`. However, this also restricts the application domains of goSAT.

## Model validation

In the case of `sat` result, it is possible to intruct `goSAT` to externally validate the 
generated model using `z3`. This can be done by providing parameter `-c`. For example,

```bash
./gosat -c -f formula.smt2
```

So far, we have not encountered any invalid result. Please report to us if you 
find any such cases.


  [Z3]: <https://github.com/Z3Prover/z3>
  [LLVM]: <http://llvm.org/>
  [online]: <http://www.cs.nyu.edu/~barrett/smtlib/QF_FP_Hierarchy.zip>
  [XSat]: <http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-41540-6_11>
  [NLopt]: <https://github.com/stevengj/nlopt>
  [paper]: <https://blog.formallyapplied.com/docs/gosat.pdf>
  [appendix]: <https://blog.formallyapplied.com/2017/05/gosat-faq/>
  [tutorial]: <https://github.com/abenkhadra/llvm-pass-tutorial>
